RFC: Ion 1.1 (#104)
amazon-ion/ion-docs: rfcs/ion_1_1/feature-inline_symbols.md

  - [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    - [Add some new encodings, but not others](#add-some-new-encodings-but-not-others)
    - [Encode maps, dicts, etc as something other than a
      struct](#encode-maps-dicts-etc-as-something-other-than-a-struct)
    - [Structs with ordered fields](#structs-with-ordered-fields)
    - [Disallow inline symbols in symbol tables](#disallow-inline-symbols-in-symbol-tables)
      - [The symbol table is treated as user-level data instead.](#invalid-symbol-table-encodings-are-treated-as-user-data)
      - [The symbol table is ignored.](#the-symbol-table-is-ignored)
      - [An error is raised by the reader.](#an-error-is-raised-by-the-reader)

## Summary

This RFC introduces syntax for defining *inline symbols* in binary Ion.

Inline symbols make it possible to write new struct field names, annotations, and symbols to a
binary Ion stream without first having to modify the active symbol table. This functionality is
already supported in Ion text, which has the option of either indexing into the symbol table
(e.g. `$10`) or defining the symbol inline (e.g. `foo` or `'foo'`).

> This capability streamlines the writing process, reduces the memory footprint of both readers and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This capability streamlines the writing process, enables reducing the memory footprint of both readers and
```
I don't think it inherently reduces memory, but allows documents to be constructed with less memory or read with less memory.  (Though I'm interested to see how the latter is accomplished.)

writers, and can shrink the overall size of the stream.

The changes described in this document are part of the larger [Ion 1.1 RFC](ion_1_1.md#rfc-ion-11).

-----

## Motivation

> All Ion streams have a *symbol table*. A symbol table is a list of known strings which can be

Reviewer: "have" is imprecise, and "a" suggests singular cardinality.

```suggestion
Each byte of an Ion stream is within the scope of a single active *symbol table*.
A symbol table is a list of known strings which can be
```

referenced by their offset into the list--their *symbol ID*--instead of writing out their complete
text each time.

Ion 1.0's [binary encoding spec](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/binary.html) requires that all
symbol values, struct field names, and annotations be encoded as [symbol
IDs](http://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/symbols.html). This means that before a given text value
can be used as a symbol, field name, or annotation, it *must* be added to the symbol table first.

This constraint incurs a number of expenses:

> * Writers must examine each top-level value that they intend to emit (however deeply nested) to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Writers must examine each value that they intend to emit (however deeply nested) to
```

  determine which of its symbols, field names, and annotations are not yet in the symbol table.
* If any such elements are found, a new Local Symbol Table (LST) or LST-append must be written
  to the stream establishing a new symbol ID for each of those elements.
* Writing the top-level value itself must be deferred until the new symbols are added to the table, 

>   necessitating additional buffering of encoded output.

Reviewer: When a stream has only one TLV, which is the most common case, the entire output must be buffered regardless of symbol encoding, due to length-prefixing of the TLV.

* Both readers and writers must hold the complete symbol table in memory. The more entries there

>   are in the symbol table, the more memory it will consume.

Reviewer: If the content wasn't in the symbol table, it'd be in the values, perhaps many times. I don't feel that this bullet supports its implication that symtabs increase memory consumption.

* Symbol IDs are encoded as variable-length unsigned integers. The more symbol IDs there are, the

>   more bytes it will take to encode the newest symbol IDs.

Reviewer: I don't see why this is an "expense", since even the longest encoded symbol ID is highly likely to be shorter than the equivalent content it replaces.

  ]
}
{
  $10: 12345, // Then encode our symbols, field names, and annotations as symbol IDs
  $11: $12,
  $13: {
    $14: $15::12.5,
	$16: 2020-10-22T16:00:00Z
  }
}
```

The symbol ID encoding requirement forces us to process our sensor data twice: once to detect any
symbols, annotations, and field names that needed to be added to the symbol table and once to write
the sensor data itself. However, because none of the values being added to the symbol table appear
more than once, we do not benefit from the compactness of the symbol ID encodings. The overhead
associated with adding each of them to the symbol table slows down the writing process and inflates
the overall size of the data.

| Format | Size in Bytes |
|:--|:--:|
| Text | 94 |
| Binary | 100 |

In some cases, this can be partially addressed by using a Shared Symbol Table at the cost of
complexity. See the section [*Inline symbols' relationship to Shared Symbol
Tables*](#inline-symbols-relationship-to-shared-symbol-tables) for more information.

### Long-lived streams

In long-lived Ion streams, the symbol ID encoding mandate can cause the symbol table to become quite
large.  This causes two problems:

> 1. Both Readers and Writers are required to hold the entire symbol table in memory. The larger it

Reviewer: Long-lived streams and singular up-front symtabs are in contradiction. The (reasonable, IMO) long-stream expectation is that you'd reset/flush the stream regularly, and symtab-append was designed to make that approach more feasible.

   becomes, the more memory it consumes. Left unchecked, this can lead to program crashes, making it
   a potential denial-of-service vector.
2. Symbol IDs are encoded as variable-length unsigned integers; higher ID numbers require more bytes
   to encode. Adding infrequently referenced text to the symbol table means that more valuable

>    symbols will be costlier to write out.

Reviewer: If you know in advance which symbols are more-frequently used, it's clear how to promote them to smaller IDs.  If you don't know that data, than I'm not sure how this proposal will be able to do any better.

Further, if you do have frequency data, then I think you're better off using a shared symtab to capture that.  Then a stream-reset is less of an issue.

the data size cost of adding `foo`, `bar`, and `baz` to the symbol table. The fields in the class
are a fixed set, so every serialized instance will need to reference each field.

Ion's `struct` data type also acts as a mapping from text keys to values of any data type. This
closely (though often imperfectly) aligns with common data types available in a variety of
programming languages, including Java's `Map<String, Object>`, JavaScript's `Object`, and so on.

Consider this example of a Python dictionary:

```python
logins_by_user_id = {
  'f354c586' : ["2020-11-05T12:01:17.900Z", "2020-11-06T21:08:16.965Z"],
  'd3f712ea' : ["2019-07-21T11:24:55.000Z", "2020-05-11T19:44:01.044Z"],
  '467cba51' : ["2020-10-03T01:51:30.011Z", "2020-10-29T22:40:40.331Z"],
}
```

Unlike classes and their analogs, the keys used in a series of maps written to an Ion stream are not
guaranteed to be the same over time. Maps using high-cardinality values like UUIDs and datetimes as
keys will have keys that never repeat.

In these cases, creating symbol IDs for these keys pollutes the symbol table; it creates additional

> entries that readers and writers must store in memory but which do not provide any data size

Reviewer: This is the most clear-cut and convincing rationale so far in the document, but it's a _better_ argument for a more-generic map type.  (The name "struct" was carefully chosen with consideration for its connotation of structured data types and their repetitive nature.)

savings. Once added, the only way to remove these values from the symbol table is to reset it. This
discards valuable symbols in the process, requiring them to be detected again downstream.

## Inline symbols

Inline symbols are an optional encoding which allow the text of a symbol, annotation, or field name to
be specified within the value itself rather than as an entry in the active symbol table. Conceptually,
they are analogous to the way symbols are encoded in text Ion.

Inline symbols give writers the flexibility to decide whether and when to add a given string to the
symbol table, allowing them to make trade-offs in data size, throughput, and memory consumption.

### Text encoding

*This RFC does not propose any syntax changes for Ion text. This description of Ion text is provided
for convenient comparison.*

In Ion text, symbols can be written out in full mid-stream without first adding them to the symbol table.

For example, in this Ion struct:

```js
{
    foo: [1, 2, 3],
    bar: true,
    baz: quux
}
```

the symbols `foo`, `bar`, `baz`, and `quux` are all defined at their usage site. These "inline"

> symbols are not in the symbol table and do not have a symbol ID.

Reviewer: This statement assumes that the section above represents the entire document.  I think less-absolute language would be appropriate.

cases:

1. Symbol values
2. Struct field names
3. Annotations
   1. Sequences of annotations on a value
   2. A single annotation on a value

#### `0xF3`: Inline symbol values

This encoding is identical to 
[the `VarUInt`-length encoding for string values](http://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/binary.html#8-string)
with the exception of the leading type descriptor byte (`0x8E` vs `0xF3`).

A `Length` field containing the number of bytes in the UTF8 representation must always be provided.
If the `Length` is zero, the symbol's text is the empty string. It is not possible to encode
`symbol.null` using type descriptor `0xF3`.

```
        7       4 3       0
        +---------+---------+
        |   15    |    3    |
        +---------+---------+======+
        |     Length [VarUInt]     |
        +--------------------------+
        |     UTF8 Representation  |
        +--------------------------+
```

While many applications simply treat strings and symbols as different encoding options for text,
others rely on the distinction between the types for their business logic. Providing this encoding

> ensures that a symbol value can be written as cheaply as a string value in any use case.

Reviewer: Not true: there's a one-byte penalty for text under 15 bytes, which covers something like the p50 of strings in practice.   (Such `string` encodings would have no Length subfield at all.)

others use inline text.

Inline symbol structs have a type descriptor byte of `0xF4`. A `Length` field containing the number
of bytes in the struct's representation must always follow the type descriptor byte. Because
non-empty structs must have at least one field and one value, a `Length` of 1 is illegal. (This
constrasts with Ion 1.0's `0xC1` struct encoding, which guarantees that fields are ordered by symbol
ID. For more details, see the section [*Structs with ordered fields*](#structs-with-ordered-fields).

Inlineable field names are encoded as a `VarInt` (not a `VarUInt`). The sign bit is used
to indicate whether the field name has been encoded as a symbol ID or as inline text.

```
        7       4 3       0
        +---------+---------+
        |   15    |    4    |
        +---------+---------+======+
        :     length [VarUInt]     :
        +==========================+=================================================+
        : field name [VarInt + optional UTF8 representation]  :        value         :
        +============================================================================+

>                     ⋮                     ⋮

Reviewer: The use of sign bit feels a bit fancy compared to the overall Ion spec, but the encodings here are otherwise sensible and straightforward.

 |  |  |  +------------------------- 1-byte positive integer
 |  |  +---------------------------- 0b1010_0101 / VarInt 37 / symbol ID field name ($37)
 |  +------------------------------- VarUInt Length: 9 bytes
 +---------------------------------- Type descriptor: inline symbol struct
```

If the sign bit is positive and the magnitude is zero, the field name is symbol ID `0`.

If the sign bit is negative and the magnitude is zero, the field name is the empty string.

The [existing rules for NOP padding in struct
fields](http://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/binary.html#nop-padding-in-struct-fields) also apply to
this representation.

#### Inlineable annotations

This RFC adds two new encodings for annotations:
1. An encoding that (like [Ion 1.0's
   encoding](http://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/binary.html#annotations)) supports annotation
   sequences of arbitrary size.
2. An encoding that is optimized for the most common case, in which there is a single annotation.

Both encodings support inline symbol definitions using the `VarInt` encoding scheme described in
the section [*Structs with inlineable field names*](#0xf4-structs-with-inlineable-field-names).

> Because Ion 1.0's wrapper encoding cannot be shorter than 3 bytes, `0xE1` and `0xE2` were not legal

Reviewer: Probably worth mentioning the meaning of `0xE0` as well.

annotation symbol IDs followed by the value being annotated. The wrapper's header provides separate
length fields for both:

1. **The total size of the encoded symbol ID sequence and the encoded value.** This allows the
   reader to skip over the entire wrapper if needed, moving to the next value in the Ion stream.
2. **The size of the encoded symbol ID sequence.** This allows the reader to skip over the
   annotations, moving to the annotated value inside the wrapper.

For example, this value:
```js
Author::"Ernest Hemingway"
```
would be encoded in binary Ion as:
```
                   E  r  n  e  s  t     H  e  m  i  n  g  w  a  y
EE 94 81 8A 8E 90 45 72 6E 65 73 74 20 48 65 6D 69 6E 67 77 61 79 
 ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  +---- Length: 16 bytes
 |  |  |  |  +------- String w/VarUInt Length
 |  |  |  +---------- Annotation symbol ID $10
 |  |  +------------- Annotations Length: 1 byte
 |  +---------------- Annotations+Value Length: 20 bytes 
 +------------------- Annotation wrapper w/VarUInt Length
```
*(The above assumes that 'Author' is already in the active symbol table as `$10`.)*

In practice, few readers leverage the ability to skip the entire wrapper due in part to their need

> to read the wrapped value's type descriptor byte before deciding whether the value can be skipped.

Reviewer: Without data, I find this statement hard to believe.

I'm willing to bet that a robust majority of skipping is based on field names, in which case the total-size in the wrapper is valuable.

Beyond that, I'd expect that it's _at least_ as common to skip a value based on its annotation as on its type.

Additionally, the wrapped values themselves already specify their encoded size. This means that two

> of the four annotation header bytes in the above example are of dubious value.

Reviewer: "dubious" feels judgemental.  It's a time vs space tradeoff.  The annotation design ensures that all values can be skipped with a single length-decode, at the cost of some redundancy in the encoding.  `0xE2` doubles the cost of skipping annotated values.

In contrast, Ion 1.1's `0xE2` encoding includes a single `length` field containing the number of
bytes used to encode the annotation sequence. This field not include the length of the value itself,

> which provides a length encoding of its own.

Reviewer: This should be more explicit in the diagram below.

```
            7       4 3       0
            +---------+---------+
Value with  |   14    |    2    |
multiple    +---------+---------+=======================================+
annotations :     length [VarUInt]                                      :
            +-----------------------------------------------------------+
            :     annotation [VarInt + optional UTF8 representation]    : ...
            +-----------------------------------------------------------+
            :     value                                                 :
            +-----------------------------------------------------------+
```

To skip an annotation sequence, the reader must read the `VarUInt` `length` and skip that number of
bytes. The reader will then be positioned over the annotated value, which it can read or skip as

> needed.

Reviewer: This is so irregular WRT to the rest of the encoding, it feel prone to bugs. I expect we'll need to make a number of modifications throughout the spec to accommodate this exception. At this point in my reading of the document, I'm not convinced this is net-positive.

	$16: 2020-10-22T16:00:00Z
  }
}
```

Because this struct layout is going to be reused frequently, the weather service could have instead
created an SST with all of the necessary symbols:

```js
$ion_1_0
$ion_shared_symbol_table::{
  name: "com.example.weather.symbols",
  version: 1,
  symbols: [ // Create a Shared Symbol Table with the necessary symbols
    "sensorId"",
    "type",
    "sensorData",
    "reading",
    "temperature",
    "celsius",
    "time",
  ]
}
```

and then imported it at the head of each datagram:

```js
$ion_1_0
$ion_symbol_table::{ // Import the SST that we defined above
  imports: [{name: "com.example.weather.symbols", version: 1}]
}
{
  $10: 12345, // Encode the weather data using the imported symbols
  $11: $12,
  $13: {
    $14: $15::12.5,
	$16: 2020-10-22T16:00:00Z
  }
}
```

This eliminates the need to write the UTF8 bytes of each expected symbol's text in the datagram
itself, shrinking the total size of the data. This benefit comes at the cost of complexity; the
stream is no longer self-contained. Readers and writers must coordinate to ensure that they both
have access to the same SSTs. If the set of symbols changes, the writer will need to

> ensure that a new version of the SST is made available.

Reviewer: It's long been observed that the downsides here can be eased in many cases by prepending or inserting the shared symbol table into the stream.  In fact originally the `$ion_shared_symbol_table` annotation, when encountered at top level, _meant_ that the reader was to add that table to its catalog.  We decided to pull that out of the primary spec and to leave such behavior to another protocol level.  Such behavior would be easy to spec out and would address a number of the concerns presented by this RFC.

So the "stream is no longer self-contained" is a red-herring; it could easily be made self-contained if the application wanted to accomplish that. It's simply not _required_.

In the case of *expected symbols*--symbols which a writer is likely to reference in a given
stream--SSTs and inline symbols can offer similar benefits. Both allow the writer to avoid writing a
Local Symbol Table definition at the beginning of an Ion stream. Streams that repeatedly reference
the same symbols and systems that reuse symbols across many streams will both benefit more from an

> SST than from inline symbols if the complexity cost is acceptable.

Reviewer: The costs aren't just complexity, it's also time/space.

SST costs the complexity of communicating the SST, but pays-back the size of the data, which at scale can be very high payback. The memory-cost to the writer is amortized-to-negligible for most server cases.

Inline symbols cost space and time when a symbol is repeated, pay-back space and time when a symbol is not repeated, and bring complexity to the writing application which has to figure out which symbols to inline without costing too much.

generated identifiers like UUIDs, or content authored by a third party over which a writer has no
authority. Such values cannot be enumerated in advance and so cannot be added to an SST; in Ion 1.0,
writing them to the stream requires a Local Symbol Table definition. Using inline symbols, however,
writers can avoid emitting a symbol table definition no matter what symbols, field names, and
annotations they encounter in the stream.

Writers have no way of knowing in advance whether the active symbol table contains *all* of the
symbols, field names, and annotations that they will be asked to write. As such, the full symbol
discovery phase of writing still has to happen for every value, even if no new symbols will ever be
found. Inline symbols make it possible to eliminate some of this processing overhead. For example, a
writer leveraging inline symbols may opt to perform lookups to see if a value is already in the
symbol table, but avoid the work of adding it to the table if it is not. Alternatively, a writer
could avoid *all* symbol table lookups for portions of a stream by always writing the text of any

> symbols, field names, and annotations inline.

Reviewer: This seems to be the only content addressing how this feature is used, and it feels short-shrift.

By itself, inline symbols don't solve the problems above. That's because making inlining a token-by-token _option_ means that you aren't preventing new SID-encoded symbols from coming down the line, which means you _still_ can't flush the symtab.  You can't flush the symtab until the application tells you it's safe to do so, at which point any undefined symbols must either cause failure or be inlined.

I don't think it's meaningful to say that the writer has a value-local choice in the matter, that applications "may opt to ... avoid the work of adding" an undefined symbol to the LST.  The LST has either been flushed or not, and if so, there's no choice in the matter.

But now there's another problem: when starting a struct (say), I don't know in advance whether there will be any un-interned field name, so I don't know which encoding to use.  So either the writer must always use the new variant, or it still needs to perform the "discovery phase".  In practice the "discovery phase" is just the encoding phase, the output being buffered in order to calculate the length-prefix.  So I'm missing how what meaningful "processing overhead" can be eliminated.

### Combining inline symbols with Ion templates

When combined with [Ion
Templates](https://github.com/amzn/ion-docs/blob/ion-templates-rfc/rfcs/ion_templates.md#rfc-ion-templates),
inline symbols can further reduce the number of symbol IDs that must be added to the symbol table.
	
Consider a template representing a class called `com.example.project.Quux`:

```js
$ion_1_1

// Define a template composed of several symbols:

$ion_symbol_table::{
  templates: [
    com.example.project.Quux::{ // Template 1, a struct with 3 blanks
	  foo: {#0},
	  bar: {#0},
	  baz: {#0}
	}
  ]
}

// Invoke template 1 with various different parameters

{#1 1 2 3}
{#1 4 5 6}
{#1 7 8 9}

// The above invocations are equivalent to:

com.example.project.Quux::{
  foo: 1,
  bar: 2,
  baz: 3,
}
com.example.project.Quux::{
  foo: 4,
  bar: 5,
  baz: 6,
}
com.example.project.Quux::{
  foo: 7,
  bar: 8,
  baz: 9,
}
```

If we use inline symbol definitions for `foo`, `bar`, `baz`, and `com.example.project.Quux` in our

> template definition, we do not need to add them to the symbol table. By allocating a single template

Reviewer: You _must_ encode those symbols inline, or you'd need to add a preceding LST to define them.

From this perspective, inline-symbols are a great boon to open content, which is something that should probably get more play in this document.

ID, we can produce a compact representation of a struct composed of several symbols without growing
the symbol table.

If the template is frequently used, it can be placed in a Shared Symbol Table.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer: I think you should consider a very different alternative: using a new IVM to switch the _entire stream_ (up to the next IVM) to inline-only.  This eliminates a lot of either-or complexity, you could probably reuse all the existing type-codes and just make tweaks to the int-encoding of SIDS like you've done here.

That's also the most manageable option from a UX perspective.   I'm really afraid to start thinking about the API complexity that's going to be needed in order to make use of these encoding options.

### Add some new encodings, but not others

For example, add inline symbol structs but not inline symbol values. This would conserve type
descriptor values and reduce the scope of the changes needed for Ion 1.1. However, it would
eliminate a key feature for writers.

> Inline symbol definitions make it possible for writers to serialize a number of values without

Reviewer: These use cases should be way up near the start of the document.  (Really the doc should start with use cases and requirements in any case, to make it clear what specific problems are addressed.)

having to modify the active symbol table. This makes it possible to:
1. Enforce restrictions on the size of the active symbol table (either by number of entries or data
size) without having to resort to resetting it.

> 2. Batch changes to the symbol table to avoid frequent LST appends.

Reviewer: Is frequent LST append seen as a problem?  They are fairly low-overhead.

3. Guarantee that all changes to the symbol table happen at particular offsets. (For example,
symbol table appends only appear every 8MB in a stream.) This makes it possible to skip-scan
over huge streams while only checking at each 8MB offset to see if there are symbol table changes

> that need to be processed.

Reviewer: This could use more explanation, I don't understand why one would do this.

### Encode maps, dicts, etc as something other than a struct

For example, write maps out as lists of key/value pairs:

```js
[(foo, 1), (bar, 2), (baz, 3)]
```

or lists in which even-indexed entries are keys and odd-indexed entries are their associated
values:

```js
[foo, 1, bar, 2, baz, 3]
```

Such solutions are implemented as a layer on top of the Ion data model itself, which presents
additional challenges. All applications relying on a custom representation of a map must perform
their own validation to guarantee that every key has an associated value and that each key is a
string or symbol value. Tools such as [PartiQL](https://partiql.org/) that are designed to work with
Ion will not recognize custom representations as maps, meaning that convenient syntax meant to work

> with key/value data will not function as expected.

Reviewer: This is a weak argument, since there are a number of higher-level data types, notably set/bag, that are not well-supported by Ion and that require special handling at higher layers.

But really this section doesn't solve the problems noted, it just moves it around.

### Structs with ordered fields

Structs cannot have a length of one byte. An empty struct will occupy zero bytes while a struct with
a single field will have a minimum of two bytes (one for the field name and one for the value). Ion
1.0 uses a length code of 1 to instead indicate that the struct's fields appear in ascending order
by symbol ID. The Ion 1.0 [struct encoding spec](amzn.github.io/ion-docs/docs/binary.html#13-struct)
states:

> Binary-encoded structs support a special case where the fields are known to be sorted such that
> the field-name integers are increasing. This state exists when L is one.

We cannot trivially offer the same special case for [structs with inlineable field
names](#0xf4-structs-with-inlineable-field-names). Field names which are defined as inline text will
not have a symbol ID by which they can be ordered. While other encodings could be substituted (for
example: "fields appear ordered lexicographically by their text"), the value proposition of such

> alternatives is unknown. As such, Ion 1.1 reserves the `Length=1` encoding for a future version of

Reviewer: WRT 0xF4, right?

Ion to leverage.

### Disallow inline symbols in symbol tables

The Ion 1.0 spec describes system-level values like symbol tables in terms of high-level constructs.
For example: a local symbol table is a top-level struct whose first annotation is
`$ion_symbol_table`. If present, the `imports` and `symbols` fields of such structs have special
meaning.

Because binary Ion 1.0 only had one way to encode these constructs, reader implementations would
often hardcode low-level, encoding-specific checks for symbol table processing. For example:

> * Checking for type code `13` to test for a struct.

Reviewer: I'd be shocked if this has ever been done. Any sane author would write the LST detector by calling something more abstract like `isStruct`.

* Checking whether the annotations list started with symbol ID `3` (`$ion_symbol_table`).
* Looking for a struct field with symbol ID `6` (`imports`) or `7` (`symbols`).

Allowing inlineable encodings to be used in symbol tables requires that readers check for higher-level
constructs in the stream, which can involve multiple low-level checks:

* Checking for type code `13` (a struct) OR type descriptor byte `0xF4` (struct with inlineable field names).
* Checking whether the annotations list started with a symbol with text `$ion_symbol_table`,
  regardless of its encoding.
* Looking for struct fields with the name `imports` or `symbols` regardless of their encoding.

> This adds a modest amount of flexibility at the expense of implementation complexity. It may be

Reviewer: Not really: the implementation will simply not bypass the general purpose abstractions in the name of optimization.
